Measuring Scientific Capabilities of Language Models
with a Systems Biology Dry Lab
Haonan Duan∗
University of Toronto
Stephen Zhewen Lu∗
SickKids
Caitlin F. Harrigan
University of Toronto
Nishkrit Desai
Axiom
Jiarui Lu
Mila
Michał Koziarski
SickKids
Leonardo Cotta
Vector Institute
Chris J. Maddison
University of Toronto
Abstract
Designing experiments and result interpretations are core scientific competencies,
particularly in biology, where researchers perturb complex systems to uncover
the underlying systems. Recent efforts to evaluate the scientific capabilities of
large language models (LLMs) fail to test these competencies because wet-lab
experimentation is prohibitively expensive: in expertise, time and equipment. We
introduce SCIGYM, a first-in-class benchmark that assesses LLMs’ iterative ex-
periment design and analysis abilities in open-ended scientific discovery tasks.
SCIGYMovercomes the challenge of wet-lab costs by running a dry lab of biologi-
cal systems. These models, encoded in Systems Biology Markup Language, are
efficient for generating simulated data, making them ideal testbeds for experimen-
tation on realistically complex systems. We evaluated six frontier LLMs on 137
small systems, and released a total of 350 systems. Our evaluation shows that while
more capable models demonstrated superior performance, all models’ performance
declined significantly as system complexity increased, suggesting substantial room
for improvement in the scientific capabilities of LLM agents.
 Website: https://h4duan.github.io/scigym-benchmark/
Code: https://github.com/h4duan/SciGym
Data: https://huggingface.co/datasets/h4duan/scigym-sbml
Eval: https://huggingface.co/datasets/h4duan/scigym-eval
1
Introduction
Scientific experimentation is the primary tool that researchers in the natural sciences use to gain
insight about our world’s physical and biological systems. A researcher can test a hypothesis by
systematically perturbing systems and observing effects. They then interpret their results and identify
the next best experiment to perform, closing the scientific discovery loop. Thus, when assessing
large language models (LLMs) capabilities as scientists, it is essential to have evaluation frameworks
effectively testing these skills. However, in this context, a fundamental challenge emerges: How can
we generate experimental data in the loop to evaluate an LLM’s scientific iteration?
For each experiment proposed by an LLM, we need to obtain data corresponding to how the system
responds to the suggested perturbations. In other domains, the success of end-to-end benchmarks has
hinged on our ability to quickly and automatically assess LLM actions. For example, SWE-bench
tests an LLM’s ability to resolve real-world GitHub issues, as evaluated by a suite of unit tests
Jimenez et al. (2024). Importantly, coding is done in formal programming languages that can be
executed and analyzed cheaply. Unfortunately, this is not attainable with a traditional laboratory
*Equal contribution.
Preprint.
arXiv:2507.02083v2  [cs.AI]  14 Jul 2025
Figure 1: SCIGYM simulates scientific discovery. Real-world scientists (left) iteratively refine
their hypotheses by designing experiments, collecting lab data, and analyzing results. In SCIGYM
(right), agents request experimental actions, receive the observation data simulated from the perturbed
reference system, and then perform analyses in a Python shell to refine their hypotheses.
setup in which experiments are expensive and laborious to perform. Substantial progress has been
made in robotics and control for self-driving labs, however these technologies are not yet mature
enough to easily be used to assess LLM performance at scale Abolhasani & Kumacheva (2023).
A promising approach comes from systems biology, where formal mathematical models of various
biological processes have been developed. BioModels (Malik-Sheriff et al., 2020) is a public
repository that hosts manually-curated models from published literature in variety of fields —such
as cell signaling, metabolic pathways, gene regulatory networks, and epidemiological models of
infectious disease. These models are stored in Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML), a
standard exchange format which provides a machine-readable representation supported by numerous
software tools for simulation and analysis (SBML.org; Dubitzky et al., 2013; Medley et al., 2018;
Hoops et al., 2006). Crucially, SBMLs can facilitate a “dry lab” in the context of a benchmark: when
an LLM requests an experiment, we can create an SBML file describing the proposed perturbation,
and return the corresponding simulated data.
Based on this insight, we introduce SCIGYM, an agentic benchmark that evaluates LLMs’ end-to-end
scientific discovery abilities. We leverage 350 SBML models from BioModels (Malik-Sheriff et al.,
2020) ranging in complexity from simple linear pathways with a handful of species and reactions to
sophisticated networks containing hundreds of molecular components and interactions. We release
two benchmark splits: small, which contains 137 models with fewer than 10 reactions each, and
large, which contains the remaining 213 models with up to 400 reactions each. Our framework
operates as follows: the agent is tasked with discovering a reference system described by a biology
model by analyzing data simulated from the SBML. The agent can perturb the simulated system and
write Python code to analyze the resulting data. Performance is assessed by measuring correctness
in topology of the graph of the true system, recovery of the reactions in the system, and percent
error in data generated by a model proposed by the agent. To succeed in our tasks, the agent must
excel in both experimental design and data analysis in an open-ended manner, mirroring the core
competencies of human scientists.
In addition to our specific benchmarking settings, SCIGYMis highly extensible, allowing researchers
to add various configurations that test different tasks, abilities, and biological systems. Although
these SBML models do not fully capture all physiological variables, these carefully curated dynamic
systems represent a treasure trove of biochemical insights derived from expert knowledge. By
harnessing these models to simulate from, we posit that faithfully recovering the underlying systems
which generate the trajectories of species concentration over time is a challenge which is suitably
complex to evaluate an agents’s scientific reasoning. We foresee this is a capability which will
translate to real-world performance when it comes to inferring mechanisms from experimental data.
We evaluated six LLMs from three frontier model families (Gemini, Claude, GPT-4) on SCIGYM-
small. We found that more capable models generally outperform their smaller counterparts, with
Gemini-2.5-Pro leading our benchmark followed by Claude-Sonnet. However, we also identified
consistent limitations across all models: 1) performance decreases as the underlying biological
system becomes more complex; 2) proposed mechanisms often overfit to experimental data without
generalizing to unseen initial conditions; and 3) models struggle to identify subtle relationships,
particularly those involving modifiers.
2
2
Background on formal biology models and SBML
Mathematical modeling of biochemical reaction networks, such as metabolic, gene regulatory, and
protein-signaling networks is one of the central tasks in systems biology (Sauro, 2020). Motivated
by the need to share models, researchers have developed standard machine-readable formats for
describing chemical reaction networks. Among these, the Systems Biology Markup Language
(SBML) has become a de facto standard for formal specifications of dynamic network models via an
XML-based standard. Going forward, we use texttt when referring to specific SBML tag types.
SBML adopts terminologies from biochemistry: reaction is the central object for describing pro-
cesses that change the quantities of species (entities such as small molecules, proteins, etc.) in a
model. The kineticLaw of a reaction specifies in MathML the speed with which this process hap-
pens. Systems described by SBMLs can be simulated as systems of ordinary differential equations, as
we discuss below, or other frameworks like discrete stochastic systems. The reaction tag can be un-
derstood in terms of the participating species found in the listOfReactants, listOfProducts,
and possibly listOfModifiers. A reaction is a directed relationship: the quantities of reactants
decrease as they are consumed, while the quantities of products increase as they are generated due
to the reaction proceeding. Modifiers affect reaction rates, and their quantities remain unchanged
through the reactions. A reaction can also define the relevant kineticLaw and listOfParameters
to characterize the rate of reactions. SBML can include other optional components, such as rule
and event tags. We refer readers to Appendix D.1 major SBML components and the SBML Level 3
language specification for more details (Hucka et al., 2019).
Figure 2: Biological process in The
Michaelis–Menten enzymatic process.
The substrate S binds to the enzyme E
(left) which catalyzes the formation of
the product P (right).
Reduced SBML Representation. For our purposes, an
SBML is a 4-tuple (S, Θ, R, T ) ∈S consisting of its
listOfSpecies S := {Sj}n
j=1, listOfParameters
Θ, listOfReactions R := {Ri}m
i=1, and all other
tags T .
Each reaction Ri := (Ri, Pi, Mi, θi, ri, Ti)
consists of its listOfReactants Ri, listOfProducts
Pi, listOfModifiers Mi, listOfParameters θi, a
kineticLaw represented as a function ri : S →R+,
and all other tags Ti.
Example system.
The Michaelis–Menten (Michaelis
et al., 2011) enzymatic process describes a system that
produces product P from the substrate S, catalyzed by
the enzyme E. The reaction is illustrated in Figure 2 and represented via the chemical equa-
tion: E + S
kon
−−⇀
↽−−
koff
ES
kcat
−−→E + P. The SBML model to describe this system consists of the
set of species S = {S, E, ES, P}, two reactions R1, R2, and parameters Θ = {koff, kon, kcat}.
The first reaction describes the reversible formation of the enzyme-substrate complex with rate
r1(S, Θ, R, T ) = vkon[E][S] −vkoff[ES], where v > 0 is the volume of the compartment where
the reaction occurs, specified in T . The second reaction represents the conversion of the substrate
to the product with rate r2(S, Θ, R, T ) = vkcat[ES]. The square brackets [·] map a species to its
time-varying concentration. We omit the time index to avoid notational clutter.
To translate this into an ODE, we sum the rates implied by the reactions for each species. For Sj we
have v · d[Sj]/dt = Pm
i=1 sij · ri(S, Θ, R, T ). sij are stoichiometric coefficients (specified in Ri or
Pi) that describe how much of each species is consumed or produced in the reaction. They are signed
according to the role of Sj in Ri: concentration decreases and sij < 0 if Sj is a reactant in reaction
Ri, concentration increases and sij > 0 if Sj is a product, and sij = 0 otherwise. We include a full
worked example of this enzyme system’s SBML and ODE in Appendix D.2, and a worked example
of an SBML with a modifier in Appendix D.3.
Simulation. Numerous simulation softwares have been developed to efficiently generate time-series
data from SBML models, with the most popular ones being libRoadRunner (Somogyi et al., 2015), and
COPASI (Hoops et al., 2006). These simulators are typically based on ordinary differential equation
(ODE) solvers. They are highly efficient and can handle various complexities in SBML specifications,
such as stiff equations arising from different reaction timescales and algebraic constraints defined
by rules. In this work, we use Tellurium (Medley et al., 2018), a python-based library using
libRoadRunner as the backend simulation engine.
3
Figure 3: Open-ended scientific iteration Agents must discover all components of missing reactions
and can update the SBML models using Python code (left). SBML models are encoded as structured
XML files, with reactions consisting of five components: reactants, products, modifiers, kinetic laws
and parameters (right).
3
SCIGYM Benchmark
3.1
Data Curation
The full curation pipeline is shown in Figure S1, and we describe briefly the major steps below.
Filtering. Starting from the curated collection of 1096 peer-reviewed models in the BioModels
repository (Malik-Sheriff et al., 2020), we first removed models with no reactions or no species. Next,
we removed models containing rule and event tags. We found that rules could leak information
about held-out reactions, artificially inflating scores. On the other hand, agents often got stuck trying
to trigger events, which can require complex combinations of interventions that our experimental
interface may not support. We classified the models in our benchmark by their curated gene ontol-
ogy (Ashburner et al., 2000) (GO) terms (Figure S4). Finally, we removed models that failed to parse
with libsbml or failed to simulate using Tellurium. This resulted in 350 models in our benchmark.
We provide a detailed breakdown of removed instances in Appendix C.1.
Preprocessing. In order to prevent memorization of SBML documents by the agent, we preprocessed
each of the filtered models by stripping optional metadata fields, shuffling core components, and
anonymizing identifiers to a unique 4-character alphanumeric string (see Appendix C.3). This
preprocessing step is how we derive an initial partial SBML which the agent has access to, from the
reference system which is kept hidden from the agent.
Determining Simulation Duration. We found that a large proportion of the models in the BioModels
database did not provide an appropriate simulation timescale in order to observe the characteristic
behavior of the mechanism. Thus, we systematically analyzed each model in our benchmark and
chose a simulation duration that either enabled the system to reach a steady state or a maximum
duration of 10000 seconds (see Appendix C.2).
3.2
Framework
Task. As illustrated in Figure 1, SBML models provide a general framework to simulate the scientific
discovery process: an SBML model is used to generate time-series data; the agent is tasked with
discovering the underlying reference system by designing experiments and analyzing their results.
One can design tasks of varying difficulty by modulating the agent’s access to the system (what
species can be observed and what perturbations are permitted). We decided to focus on a fully-
observed reaction discovery task, but SCIGYM is easily extended to any task or degree of observability
that SBML simulators can support. We allowed the agent to fully observe the concentration time
series of all species and asked it to discover the missing reaction tags connecting species in
4
the system. This task mirrors fundamental research problems in biology, such as inferring gene
regulatory networks from Perturb-seq experiments (Dixit et al., 2016) or reconstructing cellular
signaling pathways from spatial transcriptomics data (Papin et al., 2005).
Starting with a reference SBML mref = (S, Θ, R, T ), the agent is given a partial SBML mhyp =
(S, Θ′, ∅, T ) where the reactions R have been removed completely and the parameter set Θ′ contains
all parameters except those that exclusively appear in a reaction’s θi. Additionally, we remove
initialAssignment, functionDefinition, and constraint tags that reference the removed
reactions to prevent information leakage. The agent is given all units, compartments, and species
from the original model. The agent’s task is to recover the missing reactions R in mref.
Agent. We implemented a ReAct-style agent (Yao et al., 2023)using a Thoughts-Actions-Observations
framework due to its simplicity for comparing performance across different models. The agent is
required to articulate its reasoning process before taking actions, structuring its response in markdown
format with ## Thoughts and ## Action sections. The environment’s outputs (code execution
and experiment results) are then added as ## Observation sections. In the prompt, we inform the
agent that its goal is to discover the underlying biological mechanisms. To maintain an open-ended
task that better mirrors actual scientific discovery processes, we deliberately avoid specifying exact
evaluation metrics to the agent. The system prompt is provided in Section A.1.
Figure 4: SBML models serve as data simulators for vari-
ous experimental perturbations. The agent proposes pertur-
bations to the system, such as changing its initial conditions
and can receive the observed data of the perturbed system.
Action Space. In each iteration, the
agent can choose from three actions:
writing code, conducting experiments,
or submitting the model. The agent
can choose to write code or conduct
experiments or both within a single
iteration. However, once the agent
chooses to submit the model, no fur-
ther experiments or code execution
is permitted. Each action is signaled
with a corresponding markdown sub-
section, with specific response for-
mats detailed in the system prompt.
Coding. We provide a Python exe-
cution environment that enables the
agent to analyze experimental results.
When the agent chooses to write code,
the environment executes it and re-
turns stdout output or stderr messages
for any errors. The agent is instructed
in the system prompts to use print
statements for important outputs that
should be communicated back to its
reasoning process. The environment
maintains state as global variables in
its Python shell between iterations, but the agent must explicitly choose which variables to store for
future access. This design allows the agent to reuse some important data structures especially large
objects like pandas DataFrames. The agent has access to a specified set of libraries and customized
functions. A customized tool documentation is provided with docstrings (example in Section A.2). In
our experiments, we provide a wrapper around the Tellurium simulator as the customized functions
to help them simulate the proposed mechanisms.
Experiments. The agent is provided with a list of permitted experimental perturbations, detailed in
an experiment manual (example in Section A.3). This documentation explains the effects of available
perturbations and specifies the JSON format for requesting each type. In our experiments, we allow
agents to use one simple type of perturbations: changing the initial concentrations of a species, with a
detailed discussion in Section 5. When the agent requests an experiment, our environment applies the
specified perturbation to the SBML model (using libSBML libraries), simulates the modified system,
and returns time-series data to the agent. The resulting time-series data is stored in a dictionary
where the key is the iteration number and the value is the pandas DataFrame. Each dataset remains
5
Table 1: Pro models outperform their mini counterparts in SCIGYM, with Gemini dominating
in both size categories. We report the average Simulation Trajectory Error (STE) and Reaction
Matching Score (RMS) across all benchmark instances. Bold values indicate best performance.
Model
STE ↓
RMS ↑
With Modifiers
Without Modifiers
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4181
0.1527
0.1071
0.1217
0.2399
0.1839
0.2005
GPT-4.1-mini
0.6007
0.1516
0.1253
0.1320
0.2530
0.2313
0.2322
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6281
0.0858
0.0421
0.0530
0.1454
0.0805
0.0987
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3212
0.2138
0.1664
0.1817
0.3781
0.3219
0.3383
GPT-4.1
0.4611
0.2067
0.1597
0.1740
0.3517
0.2888
0.3038
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3615
0.1780
0.1698
0.1688
0.3160
0.3170
0.3047
accessible throughout the session, allowing the agent to reference previous experimental results. The
environment also provides a summary of each dataset in the observation output, giving the agent an
overview of the experimental results to inform its subsequent actions.
Model Submission. The agent may submit its final model and conclude the discovery process at
any point, subject to a maximum iteration limit (20 in our benchmark). To submit a model, the agent
must provide a code block that defines the final model in a variable named finalsbml. The agent
has direct access to the initial incomplete SBML structure inputsbml and can reference it in their
code. This approach encourages the agent to use libSBML libraries for model manipulation rather
than manual SBML construction. If the submitted model is invalid or cannot be simulated, we allow
for 3 additional debugging iterations before evaluating against the incomplete SBML structure.
3.3
Evaluation Metrics
We developed three complementary metrics to evaluate how well an agent recovers the underlying
SBML model. Our evaluation is designed to balance structural and dynamical similarity. However, it
should be noted that these metrics do not capture all aspects of SBML equivalence. For example, we
do not explicitly evaluate whether the proposed kinetic laws match the ground truth formulations.
For formal definitions of these metrics, see Appendix B.2.
Network Topology Score (NTS). To assess success in recovering the correct system topology, we
measure pairwise interactions between all species in the system and calculate F1 score. If identical
relationships between the same species appear in multiple reactions, we count them only once.
Reaction Matching Score (RMS). We evaluate the agent’s ability to recover the structures of ground
truth reactions. We consider two reactions "matched" if they have identical sets of reactants and
products. In the second, more stringent version, we additionally require matching modifiers.
Simulation Trajectory Error (STE). This metric evaluates how accurately the predicted system
matches the dynamic behavior of the true system by comparing time-series trajectories of each
species. We employ the Symmetric Mean Absolute Percentage Error (SMAPE) (Makridakis, 1993),
which normalizes errors relative to magnitude.
4
Related Work
AI Scientist Benchmarks. Most existing benchmarks have either focused on evaluating a single skill
in the scientific discovery pipeline (Laurent et al., 2024; Narayanan et al., 2024) or the one-shot ability
of LLMs to solve scientific tasks (Newsham et al., 2025). To the best of our knowledge, no previous
work evaluating the scientific method end-to-end has effectively challenged LLMs to perform open-
ended biological discovery research using experimental perturbations. DiscoveryWorld (Jansen et al.,
2024) evaluates protein outlier detection and chemical optimization in a fixed, observed dataset. That
is, unlike SCIGYM, DiscoveryWorld does not evaluate the LLM’s ability to discover the underlying
mechanisms of action in a system —it only asks the agent to reproduce the observed data. Moreover,
the evaluation pipeline used in BioDiscoveryAgent (Roohani et al., 2024) only deals with genetic
6
Table 2: All models struggle significantly more with identifying modifier relationships compared
to reactant-product. We report network topolgy performance (NTS precision and recall) across
different types of edges in reaction networks.
Metric
Relationship
Gemi-M
Gemi-P
GPT-M
GPT-P
Clau-M
Clau-P
Pre
Reactant-Product
0.453
0.448
0.415
0.371
0.385
0.442
Reactant-Modifier
0.005
0.075
0.010
0.000
0.037
0.068
Modifier-Product
0.000
0.106
0.014
0.000
0.054
0.119
Rec
Reactant-Product
0.362
0.346
0.340
0.305
0.214
0.435
Reactant-Modifier
0.001
0.032
0.002
0.000
0.016
0.042
Modifier-Product
0.000
0.055
0.007
0.000
0.021
0.088
perturbations from a fixed, predefined dataset, rather than a general model that can evaluate open-
ended hypothesis from the agent. Finally, there exist other benchmarks exploring the discovery of
equations (Shojaee et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2024; Romera-Paredes et al., 2024) and chemicals (Sprueill
et al., 2024a) with LLMs and simulated data. This line of work does not allow the agent to perturb
the system and feedback is given through fixed reward functions, a fundamentally different pipeline
from the open-ended setting we explore in SCIGYM.
Causal Discovery Benchmarks. Causal discovery seeks to identify cause-effect relationships be-
tween variables from observational or, when possible, interventional data (Tian & Pearl, 2013). Many
recent efforts have applied LLMs to causal discovery tasks with varying degrees of success (Long
et al., 2023; Jiralerspong et al., 2024). This has motivated the development of causal reasoning
benchmarks across a wide-range of scientific domains including gene regulatory networks (Chevalley
et al., 2023), clinical disease modeling (Abdulaal et al., 2024), and causal question answering for
coding and math (Wang, 2024). SCIGYM differs from existing causality benchmarks in two main
ways: 1) SCIGYM requires active planning and design of intervention experiments rather than passive
analysis of a static dataset or context; 2) SCIGYM demands a more comprehensive skill-set to succeed,
requiring agents to combine domain knowledge, data analysis skills, and coding ability to effectively
discover biological mechanisms —not just their structural relationships.
Simulations in AI for Science.
When the cost of obtaining experimental data in the real world is
prohibitively expensive, simulations offer a cheaper alternative, albeit at the risk of a simulation-to-
reality gap. In the biochemical sciences, simulation tools such as molecular dynamics (Hollingsworth
& Dror, 2018) and quantum computational chemistry (McArdle et al., 2020) have provided valuable
datasets leading to significant advances in drug discovery (Kitchen et al., 2004) and molecular
modeling (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014). Furthermore, many scientific discovery benchmarks incor-
porate simulations into their workflow to evaluate AI systems without the constraints of physical
experimentation. ChemReasoner (Sprueill et al., 2024b) provides quantum-chemical feedback to
discover active catalysts while Ma et al. (2024) use differentiable simulation to fit the coordinates of
LLM-proposed molecules. Despite these advances, most simulations in AI benchmarks fail to capture
the iterative, open-ended nature of real-world scientific discovery. Our benchmark addresses this
gap by utilizing structured SBML documents that are manually curated with experimental support to
create the drylab-in-the-loop.
5
Experiments
We evaluated six models from three frontier model families, each represented by their professional
and mini variants: Anthropic’s Claude-3.7-Sonnet-20250219 (P) and Claude-3.5-Haiku-20241022
(M); Google’s Gemini-2.5-Pro-Preview-03-25 (P) and Gemini-2.5-Flash-Preview-04-17 (M); and
OpenAI’s GPT-4.1-2025-04-14 (P) and GPT-4.1-Mini-2025-04-14 (M). These variants are categorized
based on their API pricing tiers. Due to computational resource constraints, we restricted our
evaluation to SCIGYM-small, with a total of 137 tasks.
Perturbations. For our main experiments, we permitted one type of experimental perturbation:
changing the initial concentration of a specified species to a designated amount. We selected this
approach as it represents a common and cost-effective perturbation in biological research. For
example, researchers might alter initial protein concentrations to observe downstream effects on
7
Figure 5: All agents outperform their respective zero-shot baselines. We compare each agent’s
performance with zero-shot prompting. Each marker represents performance on one system, with
circles representing pro models and squares representing mini models. Blue shows zero-shot perfor-
mance while red shows agent performance.
a signaling pathway. This perturbation type, when strategically designed, provides substantial
information about species relationships, reaction types, kinetic laws, and reaction rates. In an ablation
study, we evaluated a second perturbation type: species knockout, which completely removes a species
from the system. We used this condition to assess whether models could improve performance when
given more powerful experimental tools. The results are shown in Appendix E.1. This style of
perturbation has two main limitations: 1) they may not always be biologically plausible. For example,
scientists may not have the equipments to change initial concentrations of the requested species to the
specified amount. 2) our perturbations cannot guarantee complete system recovery of every SBML
model (Villaverde et al., 2016). However, this mirrors real-world biological research where scientists
often work with limited experimental tools.
5.1
Results
Figure 6: Agents’ performance decline as the under-
lying system’s complexity grows.
Do models learn from experiments? As
an initial validation, we implemented a
baseline direct prompting of the models.
For fair comparison, we employed similar
ReAct prompts across conditions, exclud-
ing only the experiment and tools compo-
nents. We also permitted three additional
debugging rounds in the baseline condition.
Results shown in Figure 5 demonstrate that
all models achieved lower STE and higher
RMS when using the SCIGYM framework
compared to zero-shot prompting. This
confirms that models are effectively extract-
ing and incorporating information from ex-
perimental results during the scientific dis-
covery process.
Do pro models demonstrate superior sci-
entific discovery capabilities? Table 1
presents the average performance of all six models across all systems. Detailed results per sys-
tem can be found in Section E.3. Our results show that across all model families, pro variants
consistently outperform their mini counterparts, with both lower STE errors and higher RMS scores.
This performance difference suggests that success in the scientific discovery process benefits from
the enhanced capabilities of models. Among all models evaluated, Gemini-Pro achieved the best
overall performance. Gemini-Mini also demonstrated superior performance among the mini models.
How does model performance scale with the complexity of the underlying mechanism? We plot
the performance of each model on instances aggregated by the number of reactions and species in
8
Figure 6. We find that as system complexity grows, the simulation error consistently increases across
all models tested. For example, both Claude-Sonnet and GPT-4.1 show error increases from close
to 0.1 to 0.55 when the number of reactions increases from 2 to 10. This demonstrates that agents
struggle increasingly with larger and more complex biological systems.
How does performance vary across different types of species relationships? We analyzed the
models’ ability to discover different types of relationships in biological systems. We categorized
relationships based on the roles of connected species: reactant/product, reactant/modifier, and
product/modifier connections. For each category, we computed average precision, recall, and F1
scores of NTS. Table 2 shows that all models performed substantially better at discovering reactant-
product relationships compared to relationships involving modifiers. Claude-Sonnet achieved the
highest F1 score across all relationship types, yet its score for reactant-product relationships was
more than 5 times higher than for modifier-related connections. This performance gap is expected, as
identifying modifiers requires more targeted experiments to test how specific species affect reaction
rates rather than simply observing which species are consumed or produced.
Figure 7: Agents’ proposed systems are sensitive to
perturbing initial conditions.
How robust are the proposed sys-
tems? We conducted analyses to determine
whether agents’ proposed SBML models
generalize to different initial conditions or
overfit to the specific experimental data.
We added Gaussian noise (mean zero, vari-
ance proportional to the original concen-
tration) to the initial concentrations. We
then compared the STE between proposed
models and the true system under these
perturbed conditions. Figure 7 shows that
STE increases consistently with noise lev-
els across all models. This degradation in
performance under perturbations indicates
that agents’ proposed mechanisms overfit
to the specific experimental data to some
degree rather than capturing the underly-
ing biological system’s fundamental prop-
erties.
6
Conclusion and Limitations
We introduced SCIGYM, a benchmark that evaluates an LLM’s scientific discovery ability through a
complete discovery cycle, with emphasis on experiment design and analysis. Our work addressed the
challenge of collecting experimental data by using formal biology models constructed by biologists
to create a dry lab in the loop. These models represent established knowledge of biological systems
with precise mathematical formulations of reactions, species interactions, and kinetics. In creating
SCIGYM we identified the following limitations:
Simulation to Reality Gap. Although the SBMLs in SCIGYM are peer-reviewed models of real-
world biological mechanisms, many simplifications are made in order to transform these into systems
that are possible to represent with an ODE. Therefore, conclusions derived from SCIGYM may be
systematically biased in subtle ways and not fully generalize to real-world settings. There is also
Lack of realistic noise. The ODE-based SBMLs we selected for SCIGYM gave us a realistic level
of complexity, but they do not contain any noise in the experimental simulations. As such, we are
not able to measure the effect of noise level on LLM’s ability to recover the underlying system. In
a similar vein, our simulations always provide comprehensive time-series data with many sampled
timepoints, and we did not study how measurement sparsity impacts performance.
Simplification of SBML Representations. In the curation pipeline of SCIGYM, we filter out SBML
models with more complex components like rules and events. This restricts the set of biological
systems we can evaluate and possible experiment perturbations we can design. SCIGYM does not
make full use of the richness of the SBML standard. For example, we are not specifically interrogating
9
the kineticLaw equations when comparing reactions. Thus, there is significant scope to increase
the richness and impact of SCIGYM.
Despite these limitations, we believe that SCIGYM realizes an interesting new direction for AI
scientist benchmarks. To our knowledge, SCIGYM is the first benchmark to evaluate LLMs on the full
cycle of scientific experimentation, and makes possible the study of agentic scientific decision-making.
SCIGYM is also a framework which can improve over time. As systems biologists continue to make
discoveries in their domain and add to the BioModels database, SCIGYM will also become more
robust and potentially expand to cover more, different, experimental modalities. For experimental
protocols that can be precisely specified and simulated, SCIGYM can easily be extended.
Our benchmarking results on six frontier LLMs are immediately relevant to LLM-based autonomous
experiment planning in self-driving labs, where selecting the right AI scientist to put in-the-loop has
the potential to enhance search efficiency, lower operational costs, and accelerate scientific discovery.
Looking forward, our framework produces artifacts: logs from best performer agents could be used
to improve future agent’s performance. Examples of successful strategies may aid reasoning by
chain-of-thought prompting Wei et al. (2023) or be useful data to improve agents via finetuning
Grattafiori et al. (2024). We hope that our work introduces a valuable testbed that can continue to
evolve to better capture the complexities of real scientific discovery.
References
Ahmed Abdulaal, adamos hadjivasiliou, Nina Montana-Brown, Tiantian He, Ayodeji Ijishakin, Ivana
Drobnjak, Daniel C. Castro, and Daniel C. Alexander. Causal modelling agents: Causal graph
discovery through synergising metadata- and data-driven reasoning. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
pAoqRlTBtY.
Milad Abolhasani and Eugenia Kumacheva. The rise of self-driving labs in chemical and materials
sciences. Nature Synthesis, 2(6):483–492, 2023.
Michael Ashburner, Catherine A. Ball, Judith A. Blake, David Botstein, Heather L. Butler, J. Michael
Cherry, Allan Peter Davis, Kara Dolinski, Selina S. Dwight, Janan T. Eppig, Midori A. Harris,
David P. Hill, Laurie Issel-Tarver, Andrew Kasarskis, Suzanna E. Lewis, John C. Matese, Joel E.
Richardson, Martin, Ringwald, Gerald M. Rubin, and Gavin Sherlock. Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. Nature Genetics, 25:25–29, 2000. URL https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:10718909.
Mathieu Chevalley, Yusuf Roohani, Arash Mehrjou, Jure Leskovec, and Patrick Schwab. Causalbench:
A large-scale benchmark for network inference from single-cell perturbation data, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.17283.
Atray Dixit, Oren Parnas, Biyu Li, Jenny Chen, Charles P Fulco, Livnat Jerby-Arnon, Nemanja D
Marjanovic, Danielle Dionne, Tyler Burks, Raktima Raychowdhury, et al. Perturb-seq: dissecting
molecular circuits with scalable single-cell rna profiling of pooled genetic screens. cell, 167(7):
1853–1866, 2016.
Werner Dubitzky, Olaf Wolkenhauer, Hiroki Yokota, and Kwang-Hyun Cho. Encyclopedia of Systems
Biology. Springer New York, New York, NY, 1st ed. 2013. edition, 2013. ISBN 978-1-4419-9863-7.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-9863-7.
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela
Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem
Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava
Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya
Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang
Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song,
Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan,
Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina
Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang,
Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire
10
Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron,
Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang,
Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer
van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang,
Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua
Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani,
Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz
Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat
Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya
Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman
Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang,
Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic,
Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu,
Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira
Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain
Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar
Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov,
Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale,
Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane
Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha,
Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal
Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet,
Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin
Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide
Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei,
Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan,
Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey,
Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma,
Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo,
Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew
Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita
Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola,
Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence,
Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu,
Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris
Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel
Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich,
Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine
Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban
Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat
Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang,
Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha,
Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan
Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai
Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya,
Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica
Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan
Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal,
Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran
Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A,
Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca
Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally,
Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov,
Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat,
11
Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White,
Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich
Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem
Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager,
Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang,
Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra,
Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ
Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh,
Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji
Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin,
Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang,
Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe,
Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny
Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara
Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou,
Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish
Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov,
Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian
Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi,
Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen
Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen,
Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The Llama 3 Herd of Models, November 2024. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783. arXiv:2407.21783 [cs].
Scott A. Hollingsworth and Ron O. Dror. Molecular dynamics simulation for all. Neuron, 99:
1129–1143, 2018. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:52311344.
Stefan Hoops, Sven Sahle, Ralph Gauges, Christine Lee, Jürgen Pahle, Natalia Simus, Mudita
Singhal, Liang Xu, Pedro Mendes, and Ursula Kummer. Copasi—a complex pathway simulator.
Bioinformatics, 22(24):3067–3074, 10 2006. ISSN 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btl485.
URL https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btl485.
Michael Hucka, Frank T. Bergmann, Claudine Chaouiya, Andreas Dräger, Stefan Hoops, Sarah M.
Keating, Matthias König, Nicolas Le Novère, Chris J. Myers, Brett G. Olivier, Sven Sahle,
James C. Schaff, Rahuman Sheriff, Lucian P. Smith, Dagmar Waltemath, Darren J. Wilkinson,
and Fengkai Zhang. The systems biology markup language (sbml): Language specification for
level 3 version 2 core release 2. Journal of Integrative Bioinformatics, 16(2):20190021, 2019. doi:
doi:10.1515/jib-2019-0021. URL https://doi.org/10.1515/jib-2019-0021.
Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Tushar Khot, Erin Bransom, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Bod-
hisattwa Prasad Majumder, Oyvind Tafjord, and Peter Clark.
Discoveryworld:
A vir-
tual environment for developing and evaluating automated scientific discovery agents.
(arXiv:2406.06769arXiv:2406.06769), October 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2406.06769. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06769. arXiv:2406.06769 [cs].
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R
Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
Thomas Jiralerspong, Xiaoyin Chen, Yash More, Vedant Shah, and Yoshua Bengio. Efficient causal
graph discovery using large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
01207.
Douglas B. Kitchen, Helene Yvonne Decornez, Johnathan R. Furr, and Jürgen Bajorath. Docking
and scoring in virtual screening for drug discovery: methods and applications. Nature Reviews
Drug Discovery, 3:935–949, 2004. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
1069493.
Jon M. Laurent, Joseph D. Janizek, Michael Ruzo, Michaela M. Hinks, Michael J. Ham-
merling, Siddharth Narayanan, Manvitha Ponnapati, Andrew D. White, and Samuel G. Ro-
driques.
Lab-bench: Measuring capabilities of language models for biology research.
12
(arXiv:2407.10362arXiv:2407.10362), July 2024.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2407.10362.
URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.10362. arXiv:2407.10362 [cs].
Stephanie Long, Alexandre Piché, Valentina Zantedeschi, Tibor Schuster, and Alexandre Drouin.
Causal discovery with language models as imperfect experts, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2307.02390.
Pingchuan Ma, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Minghao Guo, Zhiqing Sun, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Daniela
Rus, Chuang Gan, and Wojciech Matusik. Llm and simulation as bilevel optimizers: A new
paradigm to advance physical scientific discovery, May 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2405.09783v1.
Spyros Makridakis. Accuracy measures: theoretical and practical concerns. International journal of
forecasting, 9(4):527–529, 1993.
Rahuman S Malik-Sheriff, Mihai Glont, Tung VN Nguyen, Krishna Tiwari, Matthew G Roberts,
Ashley Xavier, Manh T Vu, Jinghao Men, Matthieu Maire, Sarubini Kananathan, et al. Biomod-
els—15 years of sharing computational models in life science. Nucleic acids research, 48(D1):
D407–D415, 2020.
Sam McArdle, Suguru Endo, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, Simon C. Benjamin, and Xiao Yuan. Quantum
computational chemistry. Reviews of Modern Physics, 92(1), March 2020. ISSN 1539-0756.
doi: 10.1103/revmodphys.92.015003. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.92.
015003.
J. Kyle Medley, Kiri Choi, Matthias König, Lucian P. Smith, Stanley Gu, Joseph L. Hellerstein,
Stuart C. Sealfon, and Herbert M. Sauro. Tellurium notebooks—an environment for reproducible
dynamical modeling in systems biology. PLoS Computational Biology, 14, 2018. URL https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:49223654.
Leonor Michaelis, Maud L. Menten, Kenneth A. Johnson, and Roger S. Goody. The original michaelis
constant: translation of the 1913 michaelis-menten paper. Biochemistry, 50 39:8264–9, 2011. URL
https://doi.org/10.1021/bi201284u.
Siddharth Narayanan, James D. Braza, Ryan-Rhys Griffiths, Manu Ponnapati, Albert Bou, Jon Lau-
rent, Ori Kabeli, Geemi Wellawatte, Sam Cox, Samuel G. Rodriques, and Andrew D. White. Aviary:
training language agents on challenging scientific tasks. (arXiv:2412.21154arXiv:2412.21154),
December 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2412.21154. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2412.21154.
arXiv:2412.21154 [cs].
Izzy Newsham, Luka Kovaˇcevi´c, Richard Moulange, Nan Rosemary Ke, and Sach Mukher-
jee.
Large language models for zero-shot inference of causal structures in biology.
(arXiv:2503.04347arXiv:2503.04347), March 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2503.04347. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04347. arXiv:2503.04347 [cs].
Jason A. Papin, Tony Hunter, Bernhard O. Palsson, and Shankar Subramaniam. Reconstruction
of cellular signalling networks and analysis of their properties. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell
Biology, 6:99–111, 2005. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm1570.
Raghunathan Ramakrishnan, Pavlo O. Dral, Pavlo O. Dral, Matthias Rupp, and O. Anatole von
Lilienfeld. Quantum chemistry structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules. Scientific Data, 1,
2014. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15367821.
Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog,
M. Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Pengming Wang,
Omar Fawzi, Pushmeet Kohli, and Alhussein Fawzi. Mathematical discoveries from program
search with large language models. Nature, 625(79957995):468–475, January 2024. ISSN
1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06924-6.
Yusuf Roohani, Andrew Lee, Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Zachary Steinhart, Kexin Huang, Alexander
Marson, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. Biodiscoveryagent: An ai agent for designing genetic
perturbation experiments. (arXiv:2405.17631), October 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2405.17631.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17631. 4 citations (Semantic Scholar/DOI) [2025-02-18]
arXiv:2405.17631 [cs].
13
Herbert M Sauro. Systems biology: introduction to pathway modeling. Ambrosius Publishing, 2020.
SBML.org. SBML.org: What is SBML? URL https://sbml.org/documents/what-is-sbml/.
Parshin Shojaee, Ngoc-Hieu Nguyen, Kazem Meidani, Amir Barati Farimani, Khoa D. Doan, and
Chandan K. Reddy. Llm-srbench: A new benchmark for scientific equation discovery with large
language models. (arXiv:2504.10415arXiv:2504.10415), April 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2504.
10415. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.10415. arXiv:2504.10415 [cs].
Endre T Somogyi, Jean-Marie Bouteiller, James A Glazier, Matthias König, J Kyle Medley, Maciej H
Swat, and Herbert M Sauro. libroadrunner: a high performance sbml simulation and analysis
library. Bioinformatics, 31(20):3315–3321, 2015.
Henry W. Sprueill, Carl Edwards, Khushbu Agarwal, Mariefel V. Olarte, Udishnu Sanyal, Con-
rad Johnston, Hongbin Liu, Heng Ji, and Sutanay Choudhury.
Chemreasoner: Heuristic
search over a large language model’s knowledge space using quantum-chemical feedback.
(arXiv:2402.10980arXiv:2402.10980), December 2024a. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2402.10980. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10980. arXiv:2402.10980 [physics].
Henry W. Sprueill, Carl Edwards, Khushbu Agarwal, Mariefel V. Olarte, Udishnu Sanyal, Conrad
Johnston, Hongbin Liu, Heng Ji, and Sutanay Choudhury. Chemreasoner: Heuristic search over
a large language model’s knowledge space using quantum-chemical feedback, 2024b. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10980.
Jin Tian and Judea Pearl. Causal discovery from changes, 2013. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
1301.2312.
Alejandro F Villaverde, Antonio Barreiro, and Antonis Papachristodoulou. Structural identifiability
of dynamic systems biology models. PLoS computational biology, 12(10):e1005153, 2016.
Zeyu Wang. CausalBench: A comprehensive benchmark for evaluating causal reasoning capabilities
of large language models. In Kam-Fai Wong, Min Zhang, Ruifeng Xu, Jing Li, Zhongyu Wei, Lin
Gui, Bin Liang, and Runcong Zhao (eds.), Proceedings of the 10th SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese
Language Processing (SIGHAN-10), pp. 143–151, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association
for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.sighan-1.17/.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models,
January 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903. arXiv:2201.11903 [cs].
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
14
Contents of Appendices
A Agent Framework
16
A.1
System Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
A.2 Tool Manual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
A.3
Experiment Manual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
B
Evaluation Metrics
20
B.1
Network Topology Scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
B.2
Reaction Recovery Scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
B.3
Symmetric Mean Absolute Percentage Error (SMAPE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
C Benchmark Curation Details
21
C.1
Filtering BioModels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
C.2
De-identifying SBML files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
C.3
Determining Simulation Timescale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
C.4
Creating Incomplete SBML Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
C.5
Classifying Curated Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
D Additional Details on SBML
24
D.1
Major SBML Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
D.2
Example SBML Document of Enzyme Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
D.3
Example SBML Document with Modifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
E Additional Experiment Results
28
E.1
Other types of experiment perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
E.2
Detailed Results by BioMD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
E.3
Detailed Results by BioMD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
15
A
Agent Framework
A.1
System Prompts
You are a biologist
investigating a biological
system. Your goal is
to discover
the
biological
mechanisms
missing
from your
model by
designing
experiments
and
analyzing
results. You must
ultimately
express
your
findings as a complete
SBML
model
that
accurately
represents
the
biological
system. Your
final
model
will be
evaluated
based on how
accurately it represents
the true
biological
system.
Your
final
model
will be evaluated by its
similarity
with the actual
system
under
different
perturbations , so discovering
the true
underlying
mechanisms
rather
than
overfitting to observed
data is
crucial.
# Action
Each time , you can choose one of the three
actions:
1. Request
Experiments: You can
request
experiments to gather
data
from the true
biological
system you are
studying. You can also
choose to perturb
the system and see how the system
responds.
This will help you better
understand
the
mechanism of the system.
2. Write
Code: You have
access to a Python
environment to run
analysis. You can use
several
scientific
computing
libraries
and
customized
functions. Your code is executed as provided , so
ensure
your
syntax is correct.
3. Submit the model: You can choose to submit the model and end the
process if you think
your
hypothesis
completely
explains
the
mechanism.
<!-- BEGIN
EXPERIMENTAL_ACTIONS
-->
<!-- END
EXPERIMENTAL_ACTIONS
-->
## Code
Execution
For your code , print the
results
you want to see , and we will
provide
them for you. However , ensure
your
print
content isn ’t too large
, as large
outputs
will be truncated. For large
variables
like
long
arrays or dataframes , you can store
them
using the ‘
shared_variables ‘ and access
them in future
sessions:
* ‘shared_variables .add(variable_name , val) ‘: Store a variable
for
future
access
* ‘shared_variables .access( variable_name ) ‘: Retrieve a previously
stored
variable
###
Libraries
You are
allowed to import the
following
libaries in your code: ‘numpy
‘, ‘pandas ‘, ‘math ‘, ‘scipy ‘, ‘sklearn ‘, ‘libsbml ‘
### Global
variable
access
- input_sbml_string (str): Initial
incomplete
SBML
model
16
- experiment_history (Dict[str , pd.DataFrame ]): Time -series
data for
all
experiments
- shared_variables : Storage
for all
variables you ’ve added in
previous
code
executions
** Important ** You can access
these
variables
directly in your code.
You can assume
they are global
variables
provided to you.
###
Customized
Functions
You can also call the follow
functions in your code.
<!-- BEGIN
CUSTOMIZED_FUNCTIONS
-->
<!-- END
CUSTOMIZED_FUNCTIONS
-->
## Add
reactions
using
libsbml
‘‘‘python
# Example of adding a reaction to an SBML
model
using
libSBML
import
libsbml
# Assuming we already
have an SBML
string
loaded
sbml_doc = libsbml. readSBMLFromString ( input_sbml_string )
model = sbml_doc.getModel ()
# Create a new
reaction
reaction = model. createReaction ()
reaction.setId (" reaction1 ")
reaction.setReversible(False)
reaction.setFast(False)
# Required in SBML
Level 3
# Add a reactant
reactant = reaction. createReactant ()
reactant.setSpecies ("A")
# Species ID
reactant. setStoichiometry (1.0)
reactant.setConstant(False)
# Required in SBML
Level 3
# Add a product
product = reaction.createProduct ()
product.setSpecies ("B")
# Species ID
product. setStoichiometry (1.0)
product.setConstant(True)
# Required in SBML
Level 3
# Write the
updated
SBML
writer = libsbml.SBMLWriter ()
updated_sbml = writer. writeSBMLToString (sbml_doc)
‘‘‘
# Submit the model
If you want to submit the model and end the process , put your
final
model as a string
variable
called ‘final_sbml ‘ in your
python
code. It is recommended
using
libsbml to modify ‘
input_sbml_string ‘ rather
than
write the entire xml on your own.
# Response
Format
17
Your
response
should
follow
thought -action
framework in markdown
formats. You should
have a thoughts
section
followed by an action
section.
"""
## Thoughts
write
down your
thoughs
here.
## Action
### Code
Include
this if you want to write
codes. Put your code in a python
block. You can only
include
one code
block in each
response.
‘‘‘python
import
numpy as np
import
pandas as pd
‘‘‘
###
Experiment
Include
this if you want to request
experiments. Put your
experiment
configuration in a json
block. You can only
include
one json
block in each
response.
‘‘‘json
{
"action ": "",
"meta_data ": {}
}
‘‘‘
### Submit
Include
this if you want to submit the model and end the
process. Put
your
final
model as a string
variable
called ‘final_sbml ‘ in
your
python
code.
‘‘‘python
import
libsbml
final_sbml =...
‘‘‘
"""
A.2
Tool Manual
‘‘‘python
def
simulate(sbml_string: str) -> pd.DataFrame:
"""
Simulates an SBML
model and
returns
time
series
data.
You can use this
function to run
simulations on your
hypothesis
model and
compare it with the data
gathered
from the
experiments.
Args:
sbml_string: an SBML
model in xml format
Returns:
- A pandas
dataframe of time
series
data for the given
sbml
models (with
columns ’Time ’ and the
species ID.)
"""
‘‘‘
18
A.3
Experiment Manual
## Available
Experiment
Actions
###
Observe
This
experiment
runs the system
with
default
settings.
‘‘‘json
{
"action ": "observe",
"meta_data ": {}
}
‘‘‘
### change
initial
concentrations
This
perturbation
changes
the
initial
concentrations of the given
species. You cannot
change the
concentration of boundary
and
constant
species.
‘‘‘json
{
"action ": " change_initial_concentration ",
"meta_data ": {
"id_species1 ": 0.2, // Set the
initial
concentration of
species
id_species1 to 0.2.
"id_species2 ": 0.5
// Only
include
the id of the
species
you want to modify. Any
species
not listed
will keep
their
default
values
}
}
‘‘‘
19
B
Evaluation Metrics
In this section, we provide additional details on the evaluation metrics used in the paper.
B.1
Network Topology Scores
For each SBML model, we construct a directed graph G = (S, E) where nodes S represent species
and edges E represent direct relationships between species in reactions. An edge (si, sj) ∈E exists
if species si appears as a reactant and sj appears as a product in any reaction. This score focuses on
the recovery of existence of pairwise interactions between species, without requiring all species in a
reaction to be correctly identified.
B.2
Reaction Recovery Scores
The language model is shown all the species in the SBML file and is explicitly tasked with recovering
deleted reactions. Thus, we can evaluate its performance using standard classification metrics
if we define a binary function f : R × R →{0, 1} that indicates whether two reactions are
equivalent. Formally, let Rtrue = {R1, R2, . . . , Rn} denote the set of ground truth reactions and let
Rpred = {R′
1, R′
2, . . . , R′
m} denote the set of predicted reactions. Given an equivalence function f,
we compute the true positive (TP) count, the false positive (FP) count, and the false negative (FN)
count.
TP = Rpred ∩Rtrue = {R′ ∈Rpred| ∃R ∈Rtrue : f(R′, R) = 1}
FP = Rpred −Rtrue = {R′ ∈Rpred| ∀R ∈Rtrue : f(R′, R) = 0}
FN = Rtrue −Rpred = {R′ ∈Rpred| ∀R′ ∈Rpred : f(R′, R) = 0}
Using these counts, we report the precision, recall, and F1 score as follows:
Precision =
|TP|
|TP| + |FP|
Recall =
|TP|
|TP| + |FN|
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
Note how RMS differs from NTS: NTS focuses on species relationships at a coarser level, awards
partial credit for partial relationships, and does not account for multiple relationships between species.
B.3
Symmetric Mean Absolute Percentage Error (SMAPE)
For ground truth time-series y and predicted series ˆy of length N, SMAPE is calculated as
SMAPE(y, ˆy) =
1
N
PN−1
i=0
|yi−ˆyi|
|y|+|ˆy| . We then average SMAPE across all species. We evaluate
models under both original and perturbed initial conditions to test whether they capture underlying
mechanistic principles or merely overfit specific experiment data.
20
C
Benchmark Curation Details
1096
Curated
BioModels
Remove models with events, with 
rules, with no species, with no 
reactions, that fail to parse or 
simulate
Determine simulation length to 
observe characteristic behaviour 
or steady state
1
2
De-identify SBML 
models: strip 
metadata, shuffle 
order, rename ids
Classify models based 
on tagged Gene 
Ontology (GO) terms
4
3
350
SciGym
Models
Figure S1: SCIGYM benchmark curation pipeline
C.1
Filtering BioModels
Among the 1,096 manually curated systems on BioModels, we filter out models that:
1. Can not be parsed by libsbml (49)
2. Can not be simulated with Tellurium (19)
3. Have no reactions (106)
4. Have no species (5)
5. Have events (145)
6. Have rules (422)
This resulted in 350 SBML models out of the original 1,096 manually curated instances.
0
200
400
600
800
Number of Species
100
101
102
Frequency
0
100
200
300
400
Number of Reactions
100
101
102
Frequency
0
2
4
6
Wall-Clock Time (s)
10
2
10
1
100
Density
Figure S2: Number of species (left), reactions (middle), and simulation wall-clock time (right) for
filtered BioModels.
C.2
De-identifying SBML files
To prevent language models from memorizing the SBML files, we design a pre-processing pipeline
that removes potentially compromising information from the models without affecting their function-
ality or simulation dynamics. This de-identification pipeline consists of three steps.
1. Strip metadata. We remove optional metadata fields from the SBML entities. These include
metaid, notes, annotations, model history, control vocabulary, dates, author information, and names*.
2. Shuffle components. We shuffle the order of parameters, reactions, species, and compartments.
3. Renaming ids. We rename the ids of all components in the model to a unique 4 character
alphanumeric identifier.
*Species names are kept such that biological entities in the system remain identifiable.
21
C.3
Determining Simulation Timescale
Each SBML instance in the BioModels database is accompanied by a SED-ML file that specifies
the simulation setup in order to reproduce the curated model. However, 204 out of the 350 filtered
models provided an auto-generated template SED-ML file with a default simulation duration of 10
seconds. We found this to be troublesome since some models require a longer simulation budget to
observe interesting behavior or reach a steady state. Thus, we developed a pipeline to systematically
compute a suitable simulation duration for every filtered BioModel. Our procedure consists of three
stages.
1. Steady-state analysis: For each model, we first attempt to solve for the steady state of the ODE
system (when every species has a rate of change less than 10−6) using the NLEQ2 algorithm. This
step may fail for some models due to numerical issues or the absence of a steady state.
2. Time-course simulation: We then simulate the ODE system by integrating over time with the
following specifications: We use the integrator defined in the original SED-ML file, defaulting to
CVODE if missing. We use a fixed step size of t = 0.05 seconds. We simulate until at least one of
three termination criteria is met:
• A steady state is reached
• The integrator fails (typically due to stiffness issues or numerical instabilities)
• The maximum simulation budget of 10,000 seconds is exhausted
3. Final duration determination: We select the final simulation duration by taking the maximum
value among the time required to reach steady state (if successfully solved in step 1), the end time of
the time-course simulation, and the original end time specified in the SED-ML file.
This approach ensures that sufficient simulation time is allocated for each model to either reach steady
state or exhibit its characteristic dynamic behavior, while still respecting any intentionally specified
simulation parameters in the original SED-ML file. We have plotted the simulation duration and
maximum species rate of change at simulation endpoint in Figure S3.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Simulation End Time (s)
100
101
102
Count
Old Simulation
New Simulation
Old Simulation
New Simulation
10
3
101
105
109
1013
1017
1021
1025
Max Rate of Change at Endpoint
Figure S3: Simulation duration (left) and maximum species rate of change at endpoint (right) before
and after processing.
C.4
Creating Incomplete SBML Models
To create benchmark questions, the final step consists of removing reactions in the SBML files that
the language model is tasked with recovering. Below, we describe this deletion operation in greater
detail.
Removing reactions. To remove a reaction without leaving any traces, we edit the SBML file such
that all references to the deleted reaction are also removed. This includes initial assignments, function
definitions, constraints that use the deleted reaction’s rate to define its own declaration.
22
Removing orphaned parameters. After removing the reactions for each question, we make a final
pass through the SBML file and remove orphaned parameters that are no longer referenced. This step
ensures that we aren’t leaking any unnecessary information to the language model.
To ensure that masked models remain valid SBML files, we only remove core SBML objects†
that contain nested references to the deleted reaction. For example, if we find a constraint with a
clause referencing a deleted reaction, we remove the entire constraint instead of removing only the
problematic clause. This guarantees that components are never functionally modified in a way that
might mutate their biological significance.
C.5
Classifying Curated Models
To gain further insight into the types of biochemical networks that our benchmark contains, we
perform an analysis of the gene ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000) (GO) terms that are tagged by each
SBML model that pass the filtration step. More precisely, for each GO term, we identify its ancestors
and attempt to map it onto one of the 318 grandchildren of the biological_process root term.
Altogether, we were able to map 601 of the 765 filtered models to target GO terms. We provide a
breakdown of these terms in Figure S4.
350 SciGym Models
unclassified (68)
signal
transduction (62)
metabolic
process (56)
cell cycle (4)
cell
development (4)
cell death (3)
other (4)
cellular process (133)
process
regulation (44)
quality 
regulation 
(13)
molecular
function
regulation (10)
bio regulation (67)
response to 
biotic stimulus
(18)
chemical
response
(6)
immune 
response
(4)
other (5)
stimulus response (33)
multicellular process (14)
developmental
process (6)
immune system process (7)
interspecies 
interaction (5)
homeostatic
process (5)
other (3)
Figure S4: SCIGYM covers a wide range of biology processes. Classification of SCIGYMmodels
by Gene Ontology (GO) terms.
†We identify first level objects as the list of core SBML objects in the libsbml package.
23
D
Additional Details on SBML
D.1
Major SBML Components
Table S1: SBML Element Definitions, reproduced from Hucka et al. (2019) Level 3 Version 2 Core
specification
SBML Element
Description
Function
A named mathematical function that may be used throughout the rest of a model.
Unit
A named definition of a new unit of measurement. Named units can be used in
the expression of quantities in a model.
Compartment
A well-stirred container of finite size where species may be located. Compart-
ments may or may not represent actual physical structures.
Species
A pool of entities of the same kind located in a compartment and participating
in reactions (processes). In biochemical network models, common examples
of species include ions, proteins and other molecules; however, in practice, an
SBML species can be any kind of entity that makes sense in the context of a
given model.
Parameter
A quantity with a symbolic name. In SBML, the term parameter is used in
a generic sense to refer to named quantities regardless of whether they are
constants or variables in a model. SBML Level 3 provides the ability to define
parameters that are global to a model as well as parameters that are local to a
single reaction.
Initial Assignment
A mathematical expression used to determine the initial conditions of a model.
This type of object can only be used to define how the value of a symbol can be
calculated from other values and symbols at the start of simulated time.
Rule
A mathematical expression added to the set of equations constructed based on
the reactions defined in a model. Rules can be used to define how a symbol’s
value can be calculated from other symbols, or used to define the rate of change
of a symbol. The set of rules in a model can be used with the reaction rate
equations to determine the behavior of the model with respect to time. Rules
constrain the model for the entire duration of simulated time.
Constraint
A means of detecting out-of-bounds conditions during a dynamical simulation
and optionally issuing diagnostic messages. Constraints are defined by an
arbitrary mathematical expression computing a true/false value from model
symbols. An SBML constraint applies at all instants of simulated time; however,
the set of constraints in model should not be used to determine the behavior of
the model with respect to time.
Reaction
A statement describing some transformation, transport or binding process that
can change the amount of one or more species. For example, a reaction may
describe how certain entities (reactants) are transformed into certain other entities
(products). Reactions have associated kinetic rate expressions describing how
quickly they take place.
Event
A statement describing an instantaneous, discontinuous change in one or more
symbols of any type (species, compartment, parameter, etc.) when a triggering
condition is satisfied.
D.2
Example SBML Document of Enzyme Process
We provide in Listing 1 the full SBML document of the enzymatic process introduced as an example
in Section 2 and used throughout the text.
Listing 1: SBML file for Enzymatic Process
1
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
2
<sbml xmlns="http://www.sbml.org/sbml/level3/version2/core" level="3" version="2">
3
<model timeUnits="second" extentUnits="mole">
4
<listOfUnitDefinitions>
5
<unitDefinition id="per_second">
6
<listOfUnits>
7
<unit kind="second" exponent="-1" scale="0" multiplier="1" />
8
</listOfUnits>
24
9
</unitDefinition>
10
<unitDefinition id="litre_per_mole_sec">
11
<listOfUnits>
12
<unit kind="mole" exponent="-1" scale="0" multiplier="1" />
13
<unit kind="litre" exponent="1" scale="0" multiplier="1" />
14
<unit kind="second" exponent="-1" scale="0" multiplier="1" />
15
</listOfUnits>
16
</unitDefinition>
17
</listOfUnitDefinitions>
18
<listOfCompartments>
19
<compartment id="comp" spatialDimensions="3" size="1e-14" units="litre"
constant="true" />
20
</listOfCompartments>
21
<listOfSpecies>
22
<species id="E" compartment="comp" initialAmount="5e-21" substanceUnits="mole"
23
hasOnlySubstanceUnits="false" boundaryCondition="false" constant="false" />
24
<species id="S" compartment="comp" initialAmount="1e-20" substanceUnits="mole"
25
hasOnlySubstanceUnits="false" boundaryCondition="false" constant="false" />
26
<species id="P" compartment="comp" initialAmount="0" substanceUnits="mole"
27
hasOnlySubstanceUnits="false" boundaryCondition="false" constant="false" />
28
<species id="ES" compartment="comp" initialAmount="0" substanceUnits="mole"
29
hasOnlySubstanceUnits="false" boundaryCondition="false" constant="false" />
30
</listOfSpecies>
31
<listOfParameters>
32
<parameter id="veq_koff" value="0.2" units="per_second" constant="true" />
33
<parameter id="veq_kon" value="1e6" units="litre_per_mole_sec" constant="true"
/>
34
<parameter id="vcat_kcat" value="0.1" units="per_second" constant="true" />
35
</listOfParameters>
36
<listOfReactions>
37
<reaction id="veq" reversible="true">
38
<listOfReactants>
39
<speciesReference species="E" stoichiometry="1" constant="true" />
40
<speciesReference species="S" stoichiometry="1" constant="true" />
41
</listOfReactants>
42
<listOfProducts>
43
<speciesReference species="ES" stoichiometry="1" constant="true" />
44
</listOfProducts>
45
<kineticLaw>
46
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
47
<apply>
48
<times />
49
<ci> comp </ci>
50
<apply>
51
<minus />
52
<apply>
53
<times />
54
<ci> veq_kon </ci>
55
<ci> E </ci>
56
<ci> S </ci>
57
</apply>
58
<apply>
59
<times />
60
<ci> veq_koff </ci>
61
<ci> ES </ci>
62
</apply>
63
</apply>
64
</apply>
65
</math>
66
</kineticLaw>
67
</reaction>
68
<reaction id="vcat" reversible="false">
69
<listOfReactants>
70
<speciesReference species="ES" stoichiometry="1" constant="true" />
71
</listOfReactants>
25
72
<listOfProducts>
73
<speciesReference species="E" stoichiometry="1" constant="true" />
74
<speciesReference species="P" stoichiometry="1" constant="true" />
75
</listOfProducts>
76
<kineticLaw>
77
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
78
<apply>
79
<times />
80
<ci> comp </ci>
81
<ci> vcat_kcat </ci>
82
<ci> ES </ci>
83
</apply>
84
</math>
85
</kineticLaw>
86
</reaction>
87
</listOfReactions>
88
</model>
89
</sbml>
To translate this SBML model into an ODE, we sum the rates of change implied by the reactions for
each species. The kineticLaw specifies the rate for each reaction as a function of the participating
species. To calculate the differential equation for each species, we multiply its signed stoichiometric
coefficient by the rate of change specified in the kineticLaw. The sign of the stoichiometric
coefficient is -1 if the species is a reactant in the reaction, +1 if it is a product in the reaction, and 0
otherwise.
For this example, we have
v d[E]
dt
= −(vkon[E][S] −vkoff[ES]) + (vkcat[ES])
(1)
v d[S]
dt
= −(vkon[E][S] −vkoff[ES])
(2)
v d[ES]
dt
= (vkon[E][S] −vkoff[ES]) −(vkcat[ES])
(3)
v d[P]
dt
= (vkcat[ES])
(4)
where v > 0 is the volume of compartment comp.
D.3
Example SBML Document with Modifier
We provide in Listing 2 a full SBML document that includes a modifier. Modifiers change kinetic
laws but are not consumed or produced in the reaction.
Listing 2: SBML example with a modifier
1
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
2
<sbml xmlns="http://www.sbml.org/sbml/level3/version2/core" level="3" version="2">
3
<model id="catalyzed_reaction_model">
4
<listOfCompartments>
5
<compartment id="v" spatialDimensions="3" size="1" constant="true"/>
6
</listOfCompartments>
7
<listOfSpecies>
8
<species id="S1" compartment="v" initialAmount="10" hasOnlySubstanceUnits="
true" boundaryCondition="false" constant="false"/>
9
<species id="S2" compartment="v" initialAmount="0" hasOnlySubstanceUnits="true
" boundaryCondition="false" constant="false"/>
10
<species id="M" compartment="v" initialAmount="5" hasOnlySubstanceUnits="true"
boundaryCondition="false" constant="false"/>
11
</listOfSpecies>
12
<listOfParameters>
13
<parameter id="k1" value="0.1" constant="true"/>
14
</listOfParameters>
26
15
<listOfReactions>
16
<reaction id="R1" reversible="false">
17
<listOfReactants>
18
<speciesReference species="S1" stoichiometry="1" constant="true"/>
19
</listOfReactants>
20
<listOfProducts>
21
<speciesReference species="S2" stoichiometry="1" constant="true"/>
22
</listOfProducts>
23
<listOfModifiers>
24
<modifierSpeciesReference species="M"/>
25
</listOfModifiers>
26
<kineticLaw>
27
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
28
<apply>
29
<times/>
30
<ci> v </ci>
31
<ci> k1 </ci>
32
<ci> S1 </ci>
33
<ci> M </ci>
34
</apply>
35
</math>
36
</kineticLaw>
37
</reaction>
38
</listOfReactions>
39
</model>
40
</sbml>
To translate this SBML model into an ODE, we sum the rates of change implied by the reactions for
each species. The kineticLaw specifies the rate for each reaction as a function of the participating
species. To calculate the differential equation for each species, we multiply its signed stoichiometric
coefficient by the rate of change specified in the kineticLaw. The sign of the stoichiometric
coefficient is -1 if the species is a reactant in the reaction, +1 if it is a product in the reaction, and 0
otherwise.
For this example, we have
v d[S1]
dt
= −vk1[S1][M]
(5)
v d[S2]
dt
= vk1[S1][M]
(6)
v d[M]
dt
= 0
(7)
where v > 0 is the volume of compartment.
27
E
Additional Experiment Results
E.1
Other types of experiment perturbations
How do models perform with other types of experimental perturbations?
We explored an
additional experimental capability by enabling agents to perform species knockouts, which completely
removes a specified species from the system by eliminating all reactions where it participates
and setting its initial concentration to zero. Such knockouts are typically extremely expensive or
impossible in general biological systems. We also acknowledge this abstraction is our custom design
rather than a standard SBML operation. Due to the computational constraints, we only did this
ablation study on two Gemini models. We observed modest performance improvements as shown in
Table S2. Future work should focus on designing biologically meaningful perturbations and exploring
whether more realistic experimental tools can substantially improve discovery performance.
Table S2: Adding knockout perturbations improve model performance modestly. We compared
Gemini models’ performance with and without access to our designed knockout operations. C
indicates changing initial concentrations, and K indicates knockout experiments. Models generally
demonstrated modest performance improvements when given access to knockout capabilities.
Model
Experiment
STE ↓
RMS ↑
with mod
w/o mod
Gemi-M
C
0.4181
0.1217
0.2005
C + K
0.4276
0.1417
0.2454
Gemi-P
C
0.3212
0.1817
0.3383
C + K
0.3003
0.1923
0.3527
E.2
Detailed Results by BioMD
Table S3: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000039 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2213
0.1667
0.1429
0.1538
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1022
0.2500
0.1429
0.1818
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5452
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
Gpt-4.1
0.5729
0.2000
0.1429
0.1667
0.2000
0.1667
0.1818
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.1629
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1298
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
E.3
Detailed Results by BioMD
Table S4: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000039 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2213
0.1667
0.1429
0.1538
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1022
0.2500
0.1429
0.1818
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5452
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
Gpt-4.1
0.5729
0.2000
0.1429
0.1667
0.2000
0.1667
0.1818
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.1629
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1298
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
28
Table S5: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000041 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6552
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3252
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8718
0.1429
0.1111
0.1250
0.1429
0.1111
0.1250
Gpt-4.1
0.7187
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8415
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3036
0.0455
0.1111
0.0645
0.0455
0.1111
0.0645
Table S6: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000043 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.9965
0.4000
0.2857
0.3333
0.6000
0.5000
0.5455
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.5637
0.1667
0.1429
0.1538
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7097
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.7679
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8383
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5688
0.1000
0.1429
0.1176
0.2000
0.3333
0.2500
Table S7: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000044 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4545
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3169
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1429
0.1667
0.1538
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4833
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.4163
0.3333
0.3750
0.3529
0.3333
0.5000
0.4000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4833
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2929
0.1667
0.1250
0.1429
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
Table S8: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000045 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.9667
0.2500
0.3333
0.2857
0.2500
0.3333
0.2857
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.6670
0.2000
0.1667
0.1818
0.2000
0.1667
0.1818
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8494
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Gpt-4.1
0.7270
0.2222
0.3333
0.2667
0.2222
0.3333
0.2667
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8563
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.9199
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
29
Table S9: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000066 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5611
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3937
0.2857
0.2857
0.2857
0.2857
0.2857
0.2857
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8539
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.6358
0.3333
0.1429
0.2000
0.3333
0.1429
0.2000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8511
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6764
0.1250
0.1429
0.1333
0.1250
0.1429
0.1333
Table S10: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000068 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0040
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.1896
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.0005
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.0257
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0002
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S11: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000072 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3495
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3401
0.2000
0.1429
0.1667
0.2000
0.1429
0.1667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7310
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.4918
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4244
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6369
0.2500
0.2857
0.2667
0.2500
0.2857
0.2667
Table S12: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000076 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0035
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.1815
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.0005
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.0136
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0003
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
30
Table S13: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000079 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2022
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2869
0.4286
0.5000
0.4615
0.5714
0.6667
0.6154
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.3794
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
Gpt-4.1
0.5643
0.2857
0.3333
0.3077
0.4286
0.5000
0.4615
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.2413
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3171
0.3333
0.5000
0.4000
0.5556
0.8333
0.6667
Table S14: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000080 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2300
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3577
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6403
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.5796
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5873
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1367
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S15: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000082 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2705
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2033
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5927
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.4703
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6056
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5290
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S16: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000084 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2929
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2624
0.2500
0.1250
0.1667
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6967
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.5450
0.0909
0.1250
0.1053
0.0909
0.1250
0.1053
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8307
0.3333
0.1250
0.1818
1.0000
0.3750
0.5455
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2615
0.2500
0.1250
0.1667
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
31
Table S17: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000092 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3167
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0021
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9322
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.1430
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5402
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0846
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S18: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000098 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.7426
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4478
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.1116
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Gpt-4.1
0.4069
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.3561
1.0000
0.2500
0.4000
1.0000
0.2500
0.4000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2657
0.1667
0.2500
0.2000
0.1667
0.2500
0.2000
Table S19: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000156 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2671
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.6261
0.3333
0.2000
0.2500
0.3333
0.2000
0.2500
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.2769
0.3333
0.2000
0.2500
0.3333
0.2000
0.2500
Gpt-4.1
0.3085
0.1667
0.2000
0.1818
0.3333
0.4000
0.3636
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4243
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3023
0.3333
0.4000
0.3636
0.6667
0.8000
0.7273
Table S20: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000157 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5773
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.5918
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.4000
0.3636
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5829
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.4000
0.3636
Gpt-4.1
0.3561
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.2500
0.2000
0.2222
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4965
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4263
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.6667
0.8000
0.7273
32
Table S21: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000159 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
1.0000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.2500
0.2000
0.2222
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2588
0.7500
0.5000
0.6000
0.7500
0.6000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9990
0.5714
0.6667
0.6154
0.5714
0.8000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1
0.4786
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
0.3333
0.4000
0.3636
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9990
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
0.3333
0.2000
0.2500
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2440
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
0.8000
0.7273
Table S22: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000184 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1836
0.5000
0.1429
0.2222
0.5000
0.1667
0.2500
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1107
0.6667
0.2857
0.4000
0.6667
0.3333
0.4444
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.3354
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.1673
0.6000
0.4286
0.5000
0.6000
0.5000
0.5455
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.3201
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4057
0.6000
0.4286
0.5000
0.6000
0.5000
0.5455
Table S23: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000191 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0275
0.4000
0.4000
0.4000
0.4000
0.5000
0.4444
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0163
0.5000
0.4000
0.4444
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4203
0.2500
0.2000
0.2222
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1
0.0055
0.5000
0.4000
0.4444
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.0438
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4257
0.5000
0.4000
0.4444
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Table S24: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000192 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4250
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1003
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6365
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.3599
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2660
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
33
Table S25: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000224 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6407
0.2000
0.1667
0.1818
0.6000
0.5000
0.5455
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3212
0.2000
0.1667
0.1818
0.6000
0.5000
0.5455
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4353
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6667
0.3333
0.4444
Gpt-4.1
0.3359
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7506
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4060
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Table S26: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000231 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0231
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1208
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5512
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.3539
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5060
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0371
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S27: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000233 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2611
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2732
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.2065
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.2401
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4110
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3013
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S28: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000258 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1344
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2931
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4833
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gpt-4.1
0.3291
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5966
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0885
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
1.0000
0.7500
0.8571
34
Table S29: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000282 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0918
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1365
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.3644
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.3056
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.3980
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2512
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S30: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000283 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8293
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2757
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5541
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.5206
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5216
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2165
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S31: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000319 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2432
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0467
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5681
0.3750
0.7500
0.5000
0.3750
0.7500
0.5000
Gpt-4.1
0.3117
0.6000
0.7500
0.6667
0.6000
0.7500
0.6667
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.3284
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0851
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
Table S32: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000322 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5064
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.5171
0.3333
0.2222
0.2667
0.3333
0.2222
0.2667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4708
0.1429
0.1111
0.1250
0.1429
0.1111
0.1250
Gpt-4.1
0.4354
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8012
0.3333
0.1111
0.1667
0.3333
0.1111
0.1667
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5632
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
35
Table S33: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000323 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2559
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2966
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5472
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.5136
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7152
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1352
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Table S34: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000329 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3470
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.8958
0.1667
0.1250
0.1429
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7202
0.2000
0.1250
0.1538
0.6000
0.5000
0.5455
Gpt-4.1
0.7084
0.4286
0.3750
0.4000
0.5714
0.6667
0.6154
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9347
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5742
0.5714
0.5000
0.5333
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Table S35: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000357 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8159
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4504
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7683
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.7003
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8223
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6243
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S36: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000359 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8930
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4009
0.1429
0.1250
0.1333
0.1429
0.1250
0.1333
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7740
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.8763
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7591
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.7117
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
0.1250
36
Table S37: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000360 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6096
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.5411
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8952
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.7970
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8390
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5745
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S38: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000361 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5061
0.1667
0.2000
0.1818
0.1667
0.2000
0.1818
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4931
0.1667
0.2000
0.1818
0.1667
0.2000
0.1818
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9735
0.0556
0.2000
0.0870
0.0556
0.2000
0.0870
Gpt-4.1
0.5194
0.2500
0.2000
0.2222
0.2500
0.2000
0.2222
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9661
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5663
0.2500
0.4000
0.3077
0.2500
0.4000
0.3077
Table S39: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000363 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2280
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0018
1.0000
0.7500
0.8571
1.0000
0.7500
0.8571
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7069
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.1685
1.0000
0.7500
0.8571
1.0000
0.7500
0.8571
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8193
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0678
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Table S40: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000405 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0563
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4653
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.3312
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6334
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4975
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
37
Table S41: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000413 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1108
0.5000
0.2222
0.3077
0.5000
0.2222
0.3077
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0726
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4716
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.0924
0.8000
0.4444
0.5714
0.8000
0.4444
0.5714
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5709
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0824
0.3333
0.2222
0.2667
0.4000
0.2222
0.2857
Table S42: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000435 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3934
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6667
0.2500
0.3636
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.5931
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9993
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.7326
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4821
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6931
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Table S43: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000438 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6830
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4543
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2000
0.1429
0.1667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8708
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.6301
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8708
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.7962
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S44: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000454 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0161
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0020
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.2175
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.3276
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.1641
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0190
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
38
Table S45: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000455 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0056
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0005
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.1924
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.1399
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0004
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S46: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000456 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1429
0.1667
0.1538
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0033
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.1217
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.1114
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.0934
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0013
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S47: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000458 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1334
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1455
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.2124
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.2314
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.2269
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2100
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S48: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000459 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1024
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.3333
0.2857
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0935
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6115
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Gpt-4.1
0.7493
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6208
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3750
1.0000
0.5455
39
Table S49: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000460 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4210
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1667
0.3333
0.2222
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1022
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6000
1.0000
0.7500
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4094
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6000
1.0000
0.7500
Gpt-4.1
0.5281
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1667
0.3333
0.2222
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4153
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2646
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6000
1.0000
0.7500
Table S50: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000461 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0070
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1667
0.3333
0.2222
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0093
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6213
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1429
0.3333
0.2000
Gpt-4.1
0.4508
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7499
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1315
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.6667
0.3636
Table S51: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000462 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2277
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2251
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6667
0.2500
0.3636
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0795
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S52: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000483 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gpt-4.1
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1250
0.1818
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
40
Table S53: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000484 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0118
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.9999
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9999
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9999
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Table S54: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000485 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0034
1.0000
0.3333
0.5000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0023
1.0000
0.3333
0.5000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7563
1.0000
0.3333
0.5000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1
0.0029
1.0000
0.3333
0.5000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7004
1.0000
0.3333
0.5000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0028
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Table S55: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000486 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9995
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Table S56: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000487 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.8000
0.6667
0.7273
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
41
Table S57: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000573 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8462
0.5000
0.1429
0.2222
1.0000
0.2857
0.4444
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.9305
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9871
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.4936
0.5000
0.1429
0.2222
1.0000
0.2857
0.4444
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9726
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.1429
0.2222
Table S58: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000591 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4766
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.5343
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1667
0.2222
0.1905
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8804
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.6136
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1429
0.1111
0.1250
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8804
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5046
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1250
0.2222
0.1600
Table S59: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000624 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1591
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0152
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6379
0.5000
0.6000
0.5455
0.5000
0.6000
0.5455
Gpt-4.1
0.0894
0.2500
0.2000
0.2222
0.2500
0.2000
0.2222
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6102
0.2500
0.2000
0.2222
0.2500
0.2000
0.2222
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0369
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S60: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000626 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2852
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3496
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8130
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.2121
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.4000
1.0000
0.5714
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8031
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0752
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
42
Table S61: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000629 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0680
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1034
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6441
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.1589
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.1727
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1898
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Table S62: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000657 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5022
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2482
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1667
0.3333
0.2222
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4208
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.9890
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9166
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0833
0.3333
0.1333
Table S63: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000663 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.9007
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
0.2000
0.1429
0.1667
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4541
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1429
0.2000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8295
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
0.4000
0.2857
0.3333
Gpt-4.1
0.8195
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8609
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6529
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S64: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000713 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6132
0.3333
0.1429
0.2000
0.3333
0.1429
0.2000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4825
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6667
0.2857
0.4000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5950
0.2500
0.2857
0.2667
0.5000
0.5714
0.5333
Gpt-4.1
0.5572
0.4000
0.2857
0.3333
0.8000
0.5714
0.6667
Claude-3.5-Haiku
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1429
0.2000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.7514
0.1429
0.1429
0.1429
0.1429
0.1429
0.1429
43
Table S65: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000728 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5007
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3680
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.3541
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1
0.7721
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5765
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3408
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Table S66: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000732 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4081
0.2857
0.3333
0.3077
0.4286
0.5000
0.4615
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3624
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5978
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.5924
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5962
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4691
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S67: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000733 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1791
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0431
0.2857
0.3333
0.3077
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7708
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Gpt-4.1
0.7855
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6667
0.3333
0.4444
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7443
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0946
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Table S68: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000742 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3315
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.7254
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9608
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.9407
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9608
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.7308
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
44
Table S69: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000753 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0200
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.7700
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5427
0.5000
0.2857
0.3636
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1
0.7924
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5112
1.0000
0.2857
0.4444
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0113
0.5000
0.2857
0.3636
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Table S70: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000755 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5058
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.5712
0.2000
0.1429
0.1667
0.2000
0.1429
0.1667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7655
0.1667
0.1429
0.1538
0.1667
0.1429
0.1538
Gpt-4.1
0.7301
0.2500
0.1429
0.1818
0.2500
0.1429
0.1818
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7671
1.0000
0.2857
0.4444
1.0000
0.2857
0.4444
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5724
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S71: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000758 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5623
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.6223
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7293
0.2000
0.2500
0.2222
0.6000
0.7500
0.6667
Gpt-4.1
0.6609
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5101
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.8190
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Table S72: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000760 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2239
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.7500
1.0000
0.8571
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4864
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9457
0.2500
0.5000
0.3333
0.3750
1.0000
0.5455
Gpt-4.1
0.1693
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.7500
1.0000
0.8571
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9801
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1298
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
45
Table S73: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000762 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3301
0.2500
0.1429
0.1818
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3810
0.5000
0.2857
0.3636
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6533
0.4000
0.2857
0.3333
0.8000
1.0000
0.8889
Gpt-4.1
0.6205
0.2500
0.1429
0.1818
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6062
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3334
0.1429
0.1429
0.1429
0.2857
0.5000
0.3636
Table S74: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000763 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8348
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4946
0.3333
0.2222
0.2667
0.8333
0.8333
0.8333
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5109
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.1667
0.2500
Gpt-4.1
0.9041
0.3333
0.2222
0.2667
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.3560
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6461
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Table S75: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000767 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3167
0.3333
0.2000
0.2500
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0859
0.5000
0.4000
0.4444
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5740
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1
0.4296
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6288
0.6667
0.4000
0.5000
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0971
0.2000
0.2000
0.2000
0.4000
0.5000
0.4444
Table S76: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000771 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5263
0.5000
0.1667
0.2500
0.5000
0.1667
0.2500
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.6038
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9068
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.4000
0.3333
0.3636
Gpt-4.1
0.6406
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9123
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
1.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
46
Table S77: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000772 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6903
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4789
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5893
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.5102
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5716
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5113
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S78: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000777 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0943
0.5000
0.1250
0.2000
0.5000
0.1667
0.2500
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.0511
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.3728
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6439
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0323
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S79: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000783 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0345
0.6000
0.3750
0.4615
0.6000
0.5000
0.5455
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1222
0.4000
0.2500
0.3077
0.4000
0.3333
0.3636
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.2966
0.4444
0.5000
0.4706
0.6667
1.0000
0.8000
Gpt-4.1
0.3509
0.4000
0.2500
0.3077
0.4000
0.3333
0.3636
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5880
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6153
0.1429
0.1250
0.1333
0.2857
0.3333
0.3077
Table S80: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000785 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6810
0.5000
0.2000
0.2857
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.7157
0.5000
0.4000
0.4444
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9884
1.0000
0.4000
0.5714
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1
0.5916
0.7500
0.6000
0.6667
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7081
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1420
0.5000
0.6000
0.5455
0.5000
0.7500
0.6000
47
Table S81: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000793 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2251
0.6667
0.4000
0.5000
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1611
0.5000
0.2000
0.2857
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.2318
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.4011
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.2500
0.4000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.3884
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2087
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S82: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000795 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2925
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2218
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4772
0.4000
0.3333
0.3636
0.6000
0.7500
0.6667
Gpt-4.1
0.2908
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7931
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2540
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Table S83: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000799 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0052
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0139
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.0539
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1
0.0477
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.1059
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0007
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Table S84: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000800 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6423
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.6242
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4681
0.6000
0.5000
0.5455
0.6000
0.5000
0.5455
Gpt-4.1
0.7413
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4336
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5820
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
48
Table S85: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000813 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6201
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1664
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9950
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.2338
0.7500
0.3750
0.5000
0.7500
0.5000
0.6000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4548
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.1667
0.2500
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1605
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Table S86: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000821 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3363
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0417
0.3333
0.2857
0.3077
0.5000
0.6000
0.5455
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9953
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.6666
0.2500
0.1429
0.1818
0.5000
0.4000
0.4444
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6647
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0721
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S87: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000827 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.7074
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2255
0.3750
0.3333
0.3529
0.3750
0.3333
0.3529
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8146
0.2857
0.2222
0.2500
0.2857
0.2222
0.2500
Gpt-4.1
0.5029
0.1667
0.1111
0.1333
0.1667
0.1111
0.1333
Claude-3.5-Haiku
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2436
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S88: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000830 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1653
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0600
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4087
0.1667
0.1429
0.1538
0.1667
0.1429
0.1538
Gpt-4.1
0.2358
0.2000
0.1429
0.1667
0.2000
0.1429
0.1667
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4174
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0891
0.2308
0.4286
0.3000
0.2308
0.4286
0.3000
49
Table S89: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000838 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0065
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5255
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1
0.0984
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6204
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2134
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
Table S90: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000847 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3448
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.7626
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7443
0.5714
0.6667
0.6154
0.5714
0.6667
0.6154
Gpt-4.1
0.7050
0.2500
0.3333
0.2857
0.2500
0.3333
0.2857
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9991
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6848
0.3750
0.5000
0.4286
0.3750
0.5000
0.4286
Table S91: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000850 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0257
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0143
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
1.0000
0.5000
0.6667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4542
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
Gpt-4.1
0.4082
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4525
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1244
0.3333
0.5000
0.4000
0.3333
0.5000
0.4000
Table S92: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000876 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6702
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3866
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8588
0.3333
0.2222
0.2667
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gpt-4.1
0.9531
0.5000
0.2222
0.3077
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5998
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.7690
0.2500
0.1111
0.1538
0.2500
0.1250
0.1667
50
Table S93: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000877 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1082
0.5000
0.2222
0.3077
0.7500
0.3750
0.5000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3931
0.2500
0.1111
0.1538
0.2500
0.1250
0.1667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7864
0.5000
0.4444
0.4706
0.6250
0.6250
0.6250
Gpt-4.1
0.2414
0.6667
0.2222
0.3333
1.0000
0.3750
0.5455
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7771
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6846
0.2500
0.1111
0.1538
0.2500
0.1250
0.1667
Table S94: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000878 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3099
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1889
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4244
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.6055
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5460
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2081
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S95: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000882 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4930
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2337
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4131
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.4068
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4811
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3510
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Table S96: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000885 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5590
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3732
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9399
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
0.7500
0.3750
0.5000
Gpt-4.1
0.2855
0.5714
0.5000
0.5333
0.8571
0.7500
0.8000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4602
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2594
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
51
Table S97: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000888 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4978
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.9439
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.4000
0.2500
0.3077
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9667
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.7537
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9916
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.7780
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S98: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000891 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4385
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.7968
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6286
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.3810
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6326
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2680
0.2000
0.1667
0.1818
0.2000
0.1667
0.1818
Table S99: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000892 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2837
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2568
0.4000
0.2500
0.3077
0.6000
0.3750
0.4615
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6208
0.2222
0.2500
0.2353
0.3333
0.3750
0.3529
Gpt-4.1
0.9315
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6680
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3288
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S100: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000893 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.6606
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Gpt-4.1-mini
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.7179
0.1429
0.1667
0.1538
0.7143
0.8333
0.7692
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9990
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6376
0.2000
0.3333
0.2500
0.7500
1.0000
0.8571
52
Table S101: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000894 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8991
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.8153
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9424
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.4601
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7297
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.1667
0.2500
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4252
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Table S102: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000897 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1853
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7894
0.2000
0.2500
0.2222
0.8000
1.0000
0.8889
Gpt-4.1
0.1427
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.0313
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0221
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Table S103: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000899 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5355
0.1111
0.1250
0.1176
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3371
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.3750
0.3750
0.3750
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6812
0.2000
0.1250
0.1538
0.2000
0.1250
0.1538
Gpt-4.1
0.5021
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7967
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6056
0.1667
0.1250
0.1429
0.1667
0.1250
0.1429
Table S104: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000902 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5301
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3585
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6784
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.5147
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6554
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5068
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
53
Table S105: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000906 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4454
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0291
0.2857
0.3333
0.3077
0.5714
0.6667
0.6154
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9590
0.1429
0.1667
0.1538
0.4286
0.5000
0.4615
Gpt-4.1
0.0571
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5222
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0188
0.4444
0.6667
0.5333
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Table S106: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000909 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2396
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0270
0.3333
0.1250
0.1818
0.3333
0.1250
0.1818
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.0471
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.4317
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.1250
0.2000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4575
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1786
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S107: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000910 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4147
0.3333
0.2000
0.2500
0.6667
0.4000
0.5000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3626
0.1429
0.2000
0.1667
0.7143
1.0000
0.8333
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9724
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.4000
0.4000
0.4000
Gpt-4.1
0.1799
0.1111
0.2000
0.1429
0.5556
1.0000
0.7143
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4670
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6632
0.1250
0.2000
0.1538
0.5000
0.8000
0.6154
Table S108: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000911 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1151
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0543
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5230
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.1657
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
0.6667
0.3333
0.4444
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7329
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.1667
0.2500
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0385
0.4286
0.5000
0.4615
0.8571
1.0000
0.9231
54
Table S109: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000912 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
1.0000
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.7861
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9923
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1
0.9186
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9186
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.9276
0.3333
0.5000
0.4000
0.6667
1.0000
0.8000
Table S110: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000914 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.6481
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1487
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7583
0.1250
0.1111
0.1176
0.2500
0.2222
0.2353
Gpt-4.1
0.3154
0.2500
0.1111
0.1538
0.5000
0.2222
0.3077
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6166
0.2500
0.1111
0.1538
0.2500
0.1111
0.1538
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
1.0000
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
Table S111: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000916 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8922
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4098
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9948
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1
0.5238
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7434
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5633
0.6000
0.7500
0.6667
0.6000
0.7500
0.6667
Table S112: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000919 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2121
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0054
0.7500
0.6000
0.6667
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4756
0.3333
0.2000
0.2500
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Gpt-4.1
0.7068
0.6667
0.4000
0.5000
1.0000
0.7500
0.8571
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.2902
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2657
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
55
Table S113: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000920 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5930
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3744
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.3782
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.2855
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.3928
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2175
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S114: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000922 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0316
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.0601
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.0601
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5956
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0746
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S115: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000923 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8408
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.6273
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.9304
0.1000
0.2500
0.1429
0.1000
0.2500
0.1429
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6447
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.7257
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.5000
0.4000
Table S116: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000927 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0244
0.3333
0.2000
0.2500
0.6667
0.4000
0.5000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0033
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.2331
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.2655
0.6000
0.6000
0.6000
0.6000
0.6000
0.6000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.3901
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0465
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
56
Table S117: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000932 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5368
0.2000
0.2000
0.2000
0.4000
0.4000
0.4000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.5107
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9231
0.1667
0.2000
0.1818
0.3333
0.4000
0.3636
Gpt-4.1
0.5627
0.5000
0.4000
0.4444
0.5000
0.4000
0.4444
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.7265
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3873
0.4000
0.4000
0.4000
0.4000
0.4000
0.4000
Table S118: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000935 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1418
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1098
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.3588
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Gpt-4.1
0.0974
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9961
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1399
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Table S119: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000937 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.9965
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4519
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.3588
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.8812
0.2857
0.3333
0.3077
0.4286
0.5000
0.4615
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9965
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4872
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Table S120: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000957 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4749
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4439
0.7500
1.0000
0.8571
0.7500
1.0000
0.8571
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7762
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.4116
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5290
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4518
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
57
Table S121: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000966 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4007
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1992
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
0.5000
0.3333
0.4000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7892
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.3250
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6848
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.1281
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
Table S122: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000967 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.7606
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4548
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
0.4000
0.2222
0.2857
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7703
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
0.2000
0.1111
0.1429
Gpt-4.1
0.6499
0.1429
0.1111
0.1250
0.2857
0.2222
0.2500
Claude-3.5-Haiku
1.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.6277
0.1667
0.1111
0.1333
0.3333
0.2222
0.2667
Table S123: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000000970 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5160
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4248
0.5000
0.6667
0.5714
0.7500
1.0000
0.8571
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.6118
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.5339
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6859
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4909
0.4000
0.6667
0.5000
0.6000
1.0000
0.7500
Table S124: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001013 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4926
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.5010
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9569
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.2500
0.3333
Gpt-4.1
0.5601
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6273
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.2703
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
58
Table S125: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001016 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.3622
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3616
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.1111
0.1538
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8454
0.3333
0.2222
0.2667
0.3333
0.2222
0.2667
Gpt-4.1
0.6198
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.6599
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.7653
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.1667
0.1111
0.1333
Table S126: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001022 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1473
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.7169
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7150
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.8688
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8103
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.8953
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Table S127: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001023 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.5806
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.5000
0.1667
0.2500
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.3232
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.4891
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
Gpt-4.1
0.4076
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.7500
0.5000
0.6000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5033
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3154
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.4000
0.3333
0.3636
Table S128: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001024 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8279
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.9429
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8474
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Gpt-4.1
0.9378
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.8567
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.8813
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
59
Table S129: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001031 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8606
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.8863
0.6000
0.7500
0.6667
0.8000
1.0000
0.8889
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.8396
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gpt-4.1
0.9275
0.2000
0.2500
0.2222
0.4000
0.5000
0.4444
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9390
1.0000
0.2500
0.4000
1.0000
0.2500
0.4000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.8417
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
0.6667
0.5000
0.5714
Table S130: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001035 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.8342
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1295
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9652
0.2500
0.1250
0.1667
0.2500
0.1250
0.1667
Gpt-4.1
0.7968
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5595
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4633
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S131: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001036 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.9579
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2877
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.9116
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.5812
0.2727
0.5000
0.3529
0.3636
0.6667
0.4706
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9709
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.4023
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Table S132: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001037 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4483
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.1832
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.5196
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.5216
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5230
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.8787
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
60
Table S133: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001038 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.2453
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.2790
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2000
0.1667
0.1818
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7061
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
Gpt-4.1
0.9284
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.4480
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5256
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Table S134: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001045 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.4787
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.4427
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.7036
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1
0.4207
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9855
0.6667
1.0000
0.8000
0.6667
1.0000
0.8000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.5421
0.3333
0.5000
0.4000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
Table S135: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001048 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.1173
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0913
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.3691
0.2500
0.1667
0.2000
0.2500
0.2500
0.2500
Gpt-4.1
0.7415
0.3333
0.1667
0.2222
0.3333
0.2500
0.2857
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.5294
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.3396
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
0.1667
0.2500
0.2000
Table S136: Detailed results for benchmark BIOMD0000001057 across all models.
Model
STE ↓
RMS (with modifiers) ↑
RMS (without modifiers) ↑
Precision
Recall
F1
Precision
Recall
F1
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.0068
0.6000
0.6000
0.6000
0.8000
1.0000
0.8889
Gemini-2.5-Pro
0.0068
0.7500
0.6000
0.6667
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Gpt-4.1-mini
0.2356
0.5000
0.4000
0.4444
0.7500
0.7500
0.7500
Gpt-4.1
0.0017
0.7500
0.6000
0.6667
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Claude-3.5-Haiku
0.9990
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Claude-3.7-Sonnet
0.0250
0.7500
0.6000
0.6667
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
61
